In today's financial services marketplace, a financial institution exists to provide a wide variety of deposit, lending, and investment products to individuals, businesses, or both. While some financial institutions focus on providing services and accounts for the general public, others are more likely to serve only certain consumers with more specialized offerings. To know which financial institution is most appropriate for serving a specific need, it is important to understand the difference between the types of institutions and the purposes they serve.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
There are 9 major types of financial institutions that provide a variety of services from mortgage loans to investment vehicles.
As financialization continues to permeate our lives, it is increasingly likely that you will have an account or product offered by several of these types.
Here we take a look at these, from central banks to neighborhood banks and everything in between.
Central Banks
Central banks are the financial institutions responsible for the oversight and management of all other banks. In the United States, the central bank is the Federal Reserve Bank, which is responsible for conducting monetary policy and supervision and regulation of financial institutions.
The Federal Reserve System (FRS), often called simply "the Fed," is the central bank of the United States and arguably the most powerful financial institution in the world. It was founded to provide the country with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and financial system.
A central bank is a financial institution given privileged control over the production and distribution of money and credit for a nation or a group of nations. In modern economies, the central bank is usually responsible for the formulation of monetary policy and the regulation of member banks.
The Fed is composed of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks that are each responsible for a specific geographic area of the U.S.
Individual consumers do not have direct contact with a central bank; instead, large financial institutions work directly with the Federal Reserve Bank to provide products and services to the general public.
The major categories of financial institutions include central banks, retail and commercial banks, internet banks, credit unions, savings, and loans associations, investment banks, investment companies, brokerage firms, insurance companies, and mortgage companies.
Understanding the Federal Reserve System
The Fed was established by the Federal Reserve Act, which was signed by President Woodrow Wilson on Dec. 23, 1913, in response to the financial panic of 1907.2 Before that, the U.S. was the only major financial power without a central bank.  Its creation was precipitated by repeated financial panics that afflicted the U.S. economy over the previous century, leading to severe economic disruptions due to bank failures and business bankruptcies. A crisis in 1907 led to calls for an institution that would prevent panics and disruptions.
The Fed has broad power to act to ensure financial stability, and it is the primary regulator of banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. It acts as the lender of last resort to member institutions who have no place else to borrow. Referred to simply as the Fed, it has a mandate to ensure there is financial stability in the system. It is also the main regulator of the country's financial institutions. Banks will often turn to the Fed as a last resort where they can borrow money when there is nowhere else to go.
The system is made up of 12 regional Federal Banks. These are based in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.
The Fed's Mandate and Duties
The monetary policy goals of the Federal Reserve are twofold: to foster economic conditions that achieve 1) stable prices and 2) maximum sustainable employment.3
The Fed's duties can be further categorized into four general areas:
Conducting national monetary policy by influencing monetary and credit conditions in the U.S. economy to ensure maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.
Supervising and regulating banking institutions to ensure the safety of the U.S. banking and financial system and to protect consumers’ credit rights.
Maintaining financial system stability and containing systemic risk.
Providing financial services, including a pivotal role in operating the national payments system, to depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign official institutions.
Fed Organizational Structure
There are seven members of the Board of Governors who are nominated by the president and approved by the U.S. Senate. Each governor serves a maximum of 14 years, and each governor's appointment is staggered by two years to limit the power of the president. In addition, the law dictates that appointments be representative of all broad sectors of the U.S. economy.
In addition, each of the twelve regional banks has its own president.
Retail and Commercial Banks
Traditionally, retail banks offered products to individual consumers while commercial banks worked directly with businesses. Currently, the majority of large banks offer deposit accounts, lending, and limited financial advice to both demographics.
Products offered at retail and commercial banks include checking and savings accounts, certificates of deposit (CDs), personal and mortgage loans, credit cards, and business banking accounts.
Retail banking, also known as consumer banking or personal banking, is banking that provides financial services to individual consumers rather than businesses. Retail banking is a way for individual consumers to manage their money, have access to credit, and deposit their money in a secure manner. Services offered by retail banks include checking and savings accounts, mortgages, personal loans, credit cards, and certificates of deposit (CDs).
Many financial services companies aim to be the one-stop-shop retail banking destination to their individual consumers. Consumers expect a range of basic services from retail banks, such as checking accounts, savings accounts, personal loans, lines of credit, mortgages, debit cards, credit cards, and CDs.
Most consumers utilize local branch banking services, which provide onsite customer service for all of a retail customer's banking needs. Through local branch locations, financial representatives provide customer service and financial advice. Financial representatives are also the lead contact for underwriting applications related to credit-approved products.
Though a consumer may not use all of these retail banking services, the primary service is a checking and savings account to deposit money. This is a common, secure way for individuals to store their cash. Furthermore, it allows them the ability to earn interest on their money. Most savings accounts offer rates based on the fed funds rate. Checking and savings accounts also come with a debit card to allow for ease of withdrawal of funds and payment for goods and services.
Retail banks are also an important source of credit for individuals. They offer consumers credit to purchase large-scale items such as homes and cars. This extension of credit can take the form of mortgages, auto loans, or credit cards. This extension of credit is an important facet of the economy as it provides liquidity to the everyday consumer, which helps the economy grow.
A money market deposit account (MMDA), also known as a money market account (MMA), is a special type of bank or credit union savings account with some features not found in regular savings accounts.
Most money market deposit accounts pay a higher interest rate than regular passbook savings accounts and often include check-writing and debit card privileges. MMDAs also come with restrictions that make them less flexible than regular checking or savings accounts.
Internet Banks
A newer entrant to the financial institution market is internet banks, which work similarly to retail banks. Internet banks offer the same products and services as conventional banks, but they do so through online platforms instead of brick and mortar locations.
Under internet banks, there are two categories: digital banks and neo-banks. Digital banks are online-only platforms affiliated with traditional banks. However, neobanks are pure digital native banks with no affiliation to any bank but themselves.
With online banking, consumers aren't required to visit a bank branch to complete most of their basic banking transactions. They can do all of this at their own convenience, wherever they want—at home, at work, or on the go.
Online banking requires a computer or other device, an Internet connection, and a bank or debit card. In order to access the service, clients need to register for their bank's online banking service. In order to register, they need to create a password. Once that's done, they can use the service to do all their banking.
Banking transactions offered online vary by the institution. Most banks generally offer basic services such as transfers and bill payments. Some banks also allow customers to open up new accounts and apply for credit cards through online banking portals. Other functions may include ordering checks, putting stop payments on checks, or reporting a change of address.
Checks can now be deposited online through a mobile app. The customer simply enters the amount before taking a photo of the front and back of the check to complete the deposit.
Online banking does not permit the purchase of traveler's checks, bank drafts, certain wire transfers, or the completion of certain credit applications like mortgages. These transactions still need to take place face-to-face with a bank representative.
Credit Unions
Credit unions serve a specific demographic per their field of membership, such as teachers or members of the military. While the products offered resemble retail bank offerings, credit unions are owned by their members and operate for their benefit.
A credit union is a type of financial cooperative that provides traditional banking services. Ranging in size from small, volunteer-only operations to large entities with thousands of participants spanning the country, credit unions can be formed by large corporations, organizations, and other entities for their employees and members.
Credit unions are created, owned, and operated by their participants. As such, they are not-for-profit enterprises that enjoy tax-exempt status.
Savings and Loan Associations
Financial institutions that are mutually held and provide no more than 20% of total lending to businesses fall under the category of savings and loan associations. Individual consumers use savings and loan associations for deposit accounts, personal loans, and mortgage lending.3
The term federal savings and loan (S&L) refers to a financial institution that focuses on providing checking and savings accounts, loans, and residential mortgages to consumers. These institutions are also referred to as thrifts—credit unions and savings banks that are mutually owned by their customers. As such, many of these companies are community-based and privately owned, although some may also be publicly-traded.
Investment Banks and Companies
Investment banks do not take deposits; instead, they help individuals, businesses and governments raise capital through the issuance of securities. Investment companies, traditionally known as mutual fund companies, pool funds from individuals and institutional investors to provide them access to the broader securities market. Robo-advisors are the new breed of such companies, enabled by mobile technology to support investment services more cost-effectively and provide broader access to investing by the public.
The term "security" refers to a fungible, negotiable financial instrument that holds some type of monetary value. It represents an ownership position in a publicly-traded corporation via stock; a creditor relationship with a governmental body or a corporation represented by owning that entity's bond; or rights to ownership as represented by an option.
Brokerage Firms
Brokerage firms assist individuals and institutions in buying and selling securities among available investors. Customers of brokerage firms can place trades of stocks, bonds, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and some alternative investments.
Insurance Companies
Financial institutions that help individuals transfer the risk of loss are known as insurance companies. Individuals and businesses use insurance companies to protect against financial loss due to death, disability, accidents, property damage, and other misfortunes.
Mortgage Companies
Financial institutions that originate or fund mortgage loans are mortgage companies. While most mortgage companies serve the individual consumer market, some specialize in lending options for commercial real estate only.
A mortgage company is a firm engaged in the business of originating and/or funding mortgages for residential or commercial property. A mortgage company is often just the originator of a loan; it markets itself to potential borrowers and seeks funding from one of several client financial institutions that provide the capital for the mortgage itself.
That, in part, is why many mortgage companies went bankrupt during the subprime mortgage crisis of 2007 - 2008. Because they weren't funding most of the loans, they had few assets of their own, and when the housing markets dried up, their cash flows quickly evaporated.
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits credit discrimination based on age, race, color, religion, national origin, gender, marital status or because you get public assistance. It’s also illegal for lenders to discourage you from applying or to impose different terms or conditions because of these factors.
Finally, it prohibits lenders lenders from denying mortgages to retirees if all standard criteria are metthings like your credit score, the size of your down payment, your liquid assets, and your debt-to-income ratio. Although it is unclear how long the trend will continue, positive economic data indicates that for the immediate future homebuyers can continue to benefit from low mortgage interest rates.

